# Plato

Plato is a pure functional programming language based on C# syntax. 
The current Plato implementation generates cross-platform (.NET Standard 2.0) managed assemblies,
that are compatible with Unity. 

Plato is designed as a general purpose cross-platform functional programming language that 
is appropriate for high-performance computing (e.g., 3D real-time graphics) and that is 
easy to teach and learn. 

Another goal of Plato is to develop a visual syntax so that Plato code 
can be viewed, manipulated, and created in either a node graph editor or 
as a text based language. 

A Plato to JavaScript compiler is in progress as well.

# Examples

Here is the Angle class in Plato 

```csharp
    [Measure]
    class Angle
    {
        double Radians;
    }
```

Here are some examples of operations provided to support using the Angle class : 

```csharp
    [Operations]
    class UnitOperations
    {
        Angle Radians(double d) => d;
        Angle Turns(double d) => d * 2 * Math.PI;
        Angle Degrees(double d) => Turns(d / 360.0);
        double ToTurns(Angle a) => a * 2 * Math.PI;
        double ToDegrees(Angle a) => ToTurns(a) * 360;
        double ToGrads(Angle a) => ToTurns(a) * 400;
    }

    [Operations]
    class TrigOperations
    {
        double Cos(Angle x) => Math.Cos(x);
        double Sin(Angle x) => Math.Sin(x);
        double Tan(Angle x) => Math.Tan(x);
    }
```

All functions that are static are treated as extension methods. In other words 
they can be called as if they were declared as methods of the type of the first parameter. 

Any functions with one parameter that start with "To" like "ToDegrees(Angle a)" are 
rewritten as properties. 

Here is an example usage:

```csharp
   var angle = 1.Turns() / 4;
   Console.WriteLine($"{angle}");
   
   var degrees = angle.Degrees
   Console.WriteLine($"Angle is {degrees:n2} degrees");

   var sin = angle.Sin();
   Console.WriteLine($"Sin(angle) = {sin}");
```


Here is the output:

```
{ "Radians" : 1.5707963267948966 }
Angle is 90.00 degrees
Sin(angle) = 1
```

Here are some Plato code files: 

* [math.types.plato.cs](https://github.com/cdiggins/plato/blob/main/PlatoStandardLibrary/math.types.plato.cs)
* [math.funcs.plato.cs](https://github.com/cdiggins/plato/blob/main/PlatoStandardLibrary/math.funcs.plato.cs)

Here is the corresponding generated C# code 

* [math.types.plato.g.cs](https://github.com/cdiggins/plato/blob/main/PlatoStandardLibrary/math.types.plato.g.cs).
* [math.funcs.plato.g.cs](https://github.com/cdiggins/plato/blob/main/PlatoStandardLibrary/math.funcs.plato.g.cs).


# Notable Features of Plato

Plato is very similar in syntax to C# but with a number of simplifications:

1. No structs just classes - the compiler may generate a struct, but this does not affect a program's behavior 
1. Readonly fields by default - all fields are readonly unless in a Unique type
1. No visibility specifiers - all types and members are public 
1. No setters - only getter properties are supported
1. No static keyword - static classes and methods are inferred 
1. Automatic extension methods - any function that is inferred to be static is an extension method.
1. Auto-generated functions and properties - similar to records in C# 9 and later

See the following article for more information:

* [wiki/Static-Classes-and-Methods](https://github.com/cdiggins/plato/wiki/Static-Classes-and-Methods)
* [wiki/Autogenerated-Code-and-Type-Categories](https://github.com/cdiggins/plato/wiki/Autogenerated-Code-and-Type-Categories)


# Motivation 

Plato strives to tackle a few things:

1. Enforce immutability at the language level
2. Use uniqueness typing to track side-effects formally and allow safe usage of imperative coding patterns  
3. Generate assemblies that work across the widest number of platforms (e.g., Unity, and legacy .NET Framework)
4. Reduce boiler plate code 
5. Target web-browsers directly, without requiring the .NET runtime embedded  
6. Produce more efficient code while using functional programming paradigms 

# About Uniqueness Typing

In Plato a unique type is a type whose values cannot be aliased (shared). 
This allows for in-place mutation and strict ordering of side effects (like a monad),
while maintaining referential transparency (aka purity).

A unique type instance cannot be captured by a lambda or stored in an an array or a 
non-unique type instance .

Unique types can be used for representing external libraries with side effects, 
interactions with the real world (e.g. Console, Files), 
or writing code that manipulates structures (e.g., Lists and read-write Arrays) in a safe way. 

# Performance 

Early experiments with Plato have demonstrated that it can produce significantly more 
efficient byte-code than a regular C# compiler
for comparable code. This is because Plato can safely make a number of assumptions 
about aliasing and side effects. It is also possible because the C# compiler is not optimized 
for functional programming patterns. 

# Current Status 

Right now I am building a large math and geometry library using Plato. 

# Final Words

I am always interested in feedback in any form. 
You can find me on twitter as [@cdiggins](https://twitter.com/cdiggins).
